Update summary of CQ/HCQ section. (#338)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.treatments.md

Furthermore, the authors acknowledge that the effect of the drugs might be different in females and pediatric subjects, since these subjects were not the part of the study.

**Summary.**
_In vitro_ evidence suggests that HCQ may be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. 
As recently discussed [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114], because the 90% effective concentration (EC~90~) of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) can be achieved in and tolerated by rheumatoid arthritis patients, it may also be possible to achieve the effective concentration in COVID-19 patients.
Additionally, HCQ was found to be effective in HIV [@doi:10/cq2hx9] and chronic Hepatitis C [@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575] patients.
Therefore, initially it was thought that it would be effective towards SARS-COV-2.

> The hypotheses were that HCQ could alleviate the development of COVID-19 through mitigation of CD154 in T cells,  could have the same effect as an antiviral like CQ pre- and post-infection, is cheaper, and has less side effects than CQ. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
@soumitagh is this what you meant? I definitely don't think you need to cut this section unless you want to! I think it's useful info for the summary

Furthermore, the authors acknowledge that the effect of the drugs might be different in females and pediatric subjects, since these subjects were not the part of the study.

**Summary.**
In vitro evidence shows HCQ may be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. 

> It was recently discussed (@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114) that since EC90 of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) could be reached and well endured in rheumatoid arthritis patients, it could be as well be administered to COVID-19 patients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It was recently discussed [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114] that since EC90 of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) could be reached and well endured in rheumatoid arthritis patients, it could also be administered to COVID-19 patients.
```
I'm not sure what "reached" means in this context

> Additionally, it was proven to be effective against HIV (@doi:10.1016/0149-2918(95)80039-5) and chronic Hepatitis C infection (@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, it was proven to be effective against HIV [@doi:10.1016/0149-2918(95)80039-5] and chronic Hepatitis C infection [@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575].
```

Therefore, initially it was thought that it would be effective towards SARS-COV-2.

> Further, HCQ was hypothesized to be safer as compared to CQ based on three reasons as depicted in the literature (@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114). The hypotheses were : HCQ could alleviate the development of COVID-19 through mitigation of CD154 in T cells;  HCQ could supposedly have same  effect as an antiviral like CQ pre and post infection and lastly it is cheaper and have less side effects as opposed CQ. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further, HCQ was hypothesized to be safer as compared to CQ [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114].
The hypotheses were that HCQ could alleviate the development of COVID-19 through mitigation of CD154 in T cells,  could have the same effect as an antiviral like CQ pre- and post-infection, is cheaper, and has less side effects than CQ. 
```

> HCQ is safer to pregnant women with autoimmune disease. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HCQ is safer for pregnant women with autoimmune disease. 
```
Citation for this?

Author: @doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.089268

> This could possibly be reason behind HCQ being predomintaly used in clinical trial as opposed to CQ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This could possibly be the reason behind HCQ being predominantly used in clinical trial as opposed to CQ.
```

> Furthermore, a separate study(@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551) investigated the safety associated with the use of this drug in SARS-COVID-19. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, a separate study [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551] investigated the safety associated with the use of this drug in COVID-19. 
```

The study involved 900,000 cases with HCQ and 300,000 cases with HCQ+AZ. 
The results showed that short term use of the drug was associated with no risk while the long-term use was associated with 65% increase in cardiovascular morbidity. 
Also, HCQ+AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular complications (15-20% increased risk of chest pain) and two-fold increased risk of mortality.

> Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess this possibility of HCQ to be a therapeutic agent for COID-19.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess this possibility of HCQ to be a therapeutic agent for COVID-19.
```

Furthermore, the authors acknowledge that the effect of the drugs might be different in females and pediatric subjects, since these subjects were not the part of the study.

**Summary.**

> In vitro evidence shows HCQ may be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_In vitro_ evidence suggests that HCQ may be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. 
```

> It was recently discussed [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114] that since EC90 of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) could be reached and well endured in rheumatoid arthritis patients, it could also be administered to COVID-19 patients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As recently discussed [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114], because the 90% effective concentration (EC~90~) of CQ in Vero E6 cells (6.90 μM) can be achieved in and tolerated by rheumatoid arthritis patients, it may also be possible to achieve the effective concentration in COVID-19 patients.
```

> Additionally, it was proven to be effective against HIV [@doi:10.1016/0149-2918(95)80039-5] and chronic Hepatitis C infection [@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, HCQ was found to be effective in HIV [@doi:10/cq2hx9] and chronic Hepatitis C [@doi:10.1002/jmv.24575] patients.
```
Highlighting that these are not in vitro or model studies, and then the reason I changed your citation is just that there is a parenthesis and we have to go to shortdoi.org to find the comparable parenthesis-free citation -- you have been doing the citations totally correctly!

> Therefore, initially it was thought that it would be effective towards SARS-COV-2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, initially it was thought that CQ/HCQ would be effective against SARS-COV-2.
```

Reviewer 3: Therefore, initially it was thought that CQ/HCQ would be effective against SARS-COV-2 infection.

> Further, HCQ was hypothesized to be safer as compared to CQ [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
see below

> The hypotheses were that HCQ could alleviate the development of COVID-19 through mitigation of CD154 in T cells,  could have the same effect as an antiviral like CQ pre- and post-infection, is cheaper, and has less side effects than CQ. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hypothesis was that HCQ could alleviate the development of COVID-19 through the mitigation of CD154 in T cells and could function similar to an antiviral either pre- or post-infection.
HCQ received particular attention because it is cheaper to manufacture and has been hypothesized to be safer than CQ [@doi:10.1093/jac/dkaa114].
```
I'm not sure if this is what you were trying to say for the antiviral part? My understanding is that CQ and HCQ are extremely similar but CQ is produced from tree bark and HCQ is manufactured in the lab and has an additional hydroxyl group added.

Author: You may take these sentences out.

> HCQ is safer for pregnant women with autoimmune disease. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Not sure you need this sentence

Reviewer 3: Yes, I agree.

Author: Take this sentence out.

> This could possibly be the reason behind HCQ being predominantly used in clinical trial as opposed to CQ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These reasons present a likely explanation for why HCQ has been used in clinical trial more often than CQ.
```

Furthermore, a separate study [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20054551] investigated the safety associated with the use of this drug in COVID-19. 

> The study involved 900,000 cases with HCQ and 300,000 cases with HCQ+AZ. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The study involved 900,000 cases treated with HCQ and 300,000 cases treated with HCQ+AZ. 
```

> The results showed that short term use of the drug was associated with no risk while the long-term use was associated with 65% increase in cardiovascular morbidity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results showed that short-term use of the drug was associated with no risk, but long-term use was associated with a 65% increase in cardiovascular morbidity. 
```
I'm not sure I totally understand what they're comparing to, since all of the 1,200,000 patients described in the sentence above would have received HCQ it sounds like?

Author: We can strike out " but long-term use was associated with a 65% increase in cardiovascular morbidity". This is with RA patients.

Reviewer: @soumitagh is above what you meant?

> Also, HCQ+AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular complications (15-20% increased risk of chest pain) and two-fold increased risk of mortality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, HCQ+AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular complications (15-20% increased risk of chest pain) and a two-fold increased risk of mortality.
```

> Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess this possibility of HCQ to be a therapeutic agent for COVID-19.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess the possibility of HCQ as a therapeutic agent for COVID-19.
```

This uncertainty is important to recognize clinically because HCQ-based treatments can lead to dangerous side effects like prolonged QT interval [@doi:10.1155/2016/4626279].
There is now evidence of increased mortality among older men receiving HCQ, and administration of HCQ and HCQ+AZ did not decrease the use of mechanical ventilation in the admitted patients [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20065920]. 
HCQ use for COVID-19 also leads to shortages for anti-malarial or anti-rheumatic use, where it has been definitively proven to be effective.

> Further investigation of HCQ in large, rigorous, multi-center clinical trials encompassing different sex, age is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further investigation of HCQ in large, rigorous, multi-center clinical trials encompassing different sex and ages is required.
```
